Blog: 5 ways to improve your analytics logging (#6664)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/5-ways-to-improve-analytics-data.md

---
date: 2023-09-06

> title: 5 ways to improve your analytics data

Author: Other titles I considered:
- How to build a good product analytics foundation
- How to log analytics you can trust
- 5 quick wins to log better data

Author: Thanks! Will give it some thought.

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - anna-debenham
featuredImage: ../images/blog/super-hog-pink.png
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
  - Product analytics
---

> > This is a guest post by [Anna Debenham](https://www.linkedin.com/in/anna-debenham/). Anna is a former developer and director of product at [Snyk](https://snyk.io/), the open-source cybersecurity company. She is currently an operating partner at [Boldstart](https://boldstart.vc/), a VC firm supporting developer-first, infra, and saas startups. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This is a guest post by [Anna Debenham](https://www.linkedin.com/in/anna-debenham/). Anna is a former developer and director of product at [Snyk](https://snyk.io/), the open-source cybersecurity company. She is currently an operating partner at [boldstart](https://boldstart.vc/), a VC firm supporting developer-first, infra, and saas startups. 
```

I believe they prefer it styled like this

Any data scientist will tell you that the worst part of their job is dealing with messy and unstructured analytics data. Usually, this is caused by software engineers carelessly logging analytics – without giving a second thought to how the data will be analyzed. The result is bad data that leads to bad decisions.

In this post, we'll cover the best practices on how to build a scalable analytics foundation that you can trust (and that your data scientist doesn't hate!).

> ## 1. Implement a naming convention

Author: I've changed the wording a bit, now its under a heading "suggested naming guide"

As your product grows, the amount of analytics data grows with it. Without naming conventions, your data quickly becomes difficult to work with. For example, your frontend developer may name an event `Account created`, while your iOS developer names the same event `create account`, and your Android developer calls it `user_sign_up`. And so now you need to remember all these differences when looking at your data! Annoying!

To ensure consistency, we recommend the following convention for event names and properties:

- Only use lowercase letters.

> - Use present-tense verbs, e.g., "submit" and "create" instead of "submitted" and "created".

Author: Not sure I follow. Why do you find it awkward?

> - Use present-tense verbs, e.g., "submit" and "create" instead of "submitted" and "created".

Reviewer 2: I think, given this Anna's guide rather our own, we should stick with her intent. I kind of get where Ian is coming from, but the most important thing is to be consistent one way or the other.

> - Use snake case, i.e., `signup_button_click`

Author: That was my same thought actually. I looked into the events json, and this is what we do, we just format it on the frontend to look differently
e.g., In the UI we show `Feature Flag Called`, but the name of the event is `$feature_flag_called`
Same for "Capture Metrics", it's `$capture_metrics`.
Annoyingly, `Group Identify` is `$groupidentify`

> - Use snake case, i.e., `signup_button_click`

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/issues/6681 👍

- For event names, use the `Category:object_action` framework:
  - `Category` describes the context the event took place in – e.g., `account_settings` or `signup_flow` 
  - `object` is a noun that refers to the component or location the event took place in, like `forget_password_button` or `pricing_page`.
  - `action` is a verb that describes what happened, like `click`, `submitted`, or `create`
  - Putting all of these together, you get `account_settings:forget_password_button_click` or `signup_flow:pricing_page_view`

- Create a dedicated list of allowed verbs, and don't deviate from it. Here's ours:
  ```
  - click
  - submit
  - create
  - view
  - add
  - invite
  - update
  - delete
  - remove
  - start
  - end
  - cancel
  - fail
  - generate
  - send
  ```

- For property names:
  - After the descriptor, add a noun that explains the specific aspect of that descriptor. For instance: `user_id`, `item_price`, or `member_count`.
  - Use `is/has` prefixes for boolean properties. For example: `is_subscribed`, `has_seen_upsell`.
  - If the property's value is a date or timestamp, include _date or _timestamp at the end. For example, `user_creation_date`, `last_login_timestamp`.

> 

Author: I think its okay to exclude. We have 2 callouts already the promote PostHog, so I dont want to go overboard

## 2. Prefer backend to frontend events

Backend analytics are more reliable than frontend analytics. There are two reasons for this:

1. Many users have tracking disabled on their browsers (especially tech-savvy users).
2. Frontend analytics often rely on JavaScript execution, which can be interrupted by various factors – such as network issues, CORS, browser settings, and more.

Thus, when possible, you should log events on your server instead of on your client.

> That doesn't mean that frontend analytics are entirely useless, though. As long as you're aware that they're only showing a segment of your data, they can still be a useful guide. Just make sure you're validating any business critical metrics against backend events or what's stored in your database! For example, instead of relying on frontend events to see how many users have signed up, rather query your database.

Author: reworked this section

## 3. Deploy a reverse proxy

As mentioned above, tracking blockers can prevent your events from being sent. To make your frontend analytics more reliable, you can capture your events using a reverse proxy.

A reverse proxy enables you to send events to your analytics provider using your domain instead of your provider's domain. This makes events less likely to be intercepted by tracking blockers.

> > **Tip:** If you're using PostHog to capture events, you can read our docs on [how to set up a reverse proxy](https://posthog.com/docs/advanced/proxy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Tip:** If you're using PostHog to capture events, you can [set up a reverse proxy](https://posthog.com/docs/advanced/proxy).
```

Simpler and removes the mixed tense (can't say 'our' if Anna is the author)

## 4. Version your events

As your application evolves, so will the events you track. Implementing a versioning system for your events ensures you can easily distinguish between older and newer events, especially when significant changes occur.

For example, if you initially tracked an event as `registration:sign_up_button_click` and 
later revamped your registration flow, you can introduce a new version of this event `registration_v2:sign_up_button_click`. This way, you preserve historical data on the old event while making it easy to compare the impact of your new changes.

## 5. Filter out internal users

> When developing or testing your app, your actions skew your data and paint an inaccurate picture of actual user activity. Thus, it's important to filter out events sent by your own team (although this becomes less important as your user base grows since you're less likely to skew your data then).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When developing or testing your app, your actions skew your data and paint an inaccurate picture of actual user activity. Thus, it's important to filter out events sent by your own team (this becomes less important as you grows as you're less likely to skew your data then).
```

There are a few ways to do this:

- Filter out internal emails.
- Add a property on your events `is_employee` or `is_test_user` and filter events where these are `true`.
- Exclude internal IPs from your analytics tracking.

> - Filter events by domain host e.g., exclude `localhost:3000`, `staging.yourapp.com`.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Filter events by domain host e.g., exclude `localhost:3000`, `staging.yourapp.com`.
- Turn off tracking in development using a `localhost`, `dev`, or config check.

```

> > **Tip:** For a detailed guide on how to do this, see our tutorial on [how to filter out internal users in PostHog](https://posthog.com/tutorials/filter-internal-users).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> **Tip:** For a detailed guide on how to do this, see our tutorial on [how to filter out internal users in PostHog](/tutorials/filter-internal-users).
```

---
date: 2023-09-06
title: 5 ways to improve your analytics data
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - anna-debenham
featuredImage: ../images/blog/super-hog-pink.png
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
  - Product analytics
---

> This is a guest post by [Anna Debenham](https://www.linkedin.com/in/anna-debenham/). Anna is a former developer and director of product at [Snyk](https://snyk.io/), the open-source cybersecurity company. She is currently an operating partner at [boldstart](https://boldstart.vc/), a VC firm supporting developer-first, infra, and saas startups. 

> Any data scientist will tell you the worst part of their job is dealing with messy and unstructured analytics data. Usually, this is caused by software engineers carelessly capturing analytics – without a second thought about how the data will be used. The result is bad data that leads to bad decisions.

Reviewer 4: Softened this sentence a bit as it felt a bit finger-pointy.

- Turn off tracking in development using a `localhost`, `dev`, or config check.

> **Tip:** Rather than add these filters to each new [insight](/docs/product-analytics/insights) you create, set it as your default filter.
> 
> For a detailed guide on how to do this in PostHog, see the tutorial on [how to filter out internal users in PostHog](/tutorials/filter-internal-users).

## 3. Prefer backend to frontend tracking

Backend analytics are more reliable than frontend analytics. There are 3 reasons for this:

1. Many users have tracking disabled or blocked on their browsers (especially tech-savvy users).
2. Frontend analytics often rely on JavaScript execution, which can be interrupted by various factors – such as network issues, CORS, browser settings, and more.
3. You have complete control of your backend implementation and execution.

Thus, when possible, log events on your server instead of on your client.

That doesn't mean that frontend analytics are entirely useless, though. As long as you know they're only showing a portion of your data, they can still be useful. 

Below is a guide to help you decide when to rely on frontend or backend analytics:

> - Use frontend analytics if you want to:

Reviewer 4: Softened this. I didn't want it to sound like frontend events are inferior, when a lot of your product is based on it!

  - Understand user journeys, such as the sequence of pages a user visits.
  - Track user interactions like clicks, scrolls, or form submissions.
  - Gather data on client-side performance, like page load times and responsiveness.

- Use backend analytics (or query your database) if:
  - You need accurate data – e.g., the number of users that signed up in the last week.
  - You want to analyze data alongside other business metrics.

## 4. Deploy a reverse proxy

As mentioned above, tracking blockers can prevent your events from being sent. To make your frontend analytics more reliable, you can capture your events using a reverse proxy.

A reverse proxy enables you to send events to your analytics provider through your domain instead of your provider's. This makes events less likely to be intercepted by tracking blockers.

> **Tip:** If you're using PostHog to capture events, here's how you can [set up a reverse proxy](/docs/advanced/proxy).

## 5. Version your events

As your application evolves, so do the events you track. Implementing a versioning system for events ensures you can easily distinguish between older and newer events, especially when significant changes occur.

> 

Reviewer 4: Not in love with this heading, but it felt better than "Summary".

---

> date: 2023-09-06

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-09-12
```

> title: 5 ways to improve your analytics data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: How to structure your analytics data so it's usable
```

I feel like this is the most "what it says on the tin" title for this. Talk of "foundations" is too abstract.

> title: 5 ways to improve your analytics data

Author: Thanks both for the suggestions. I went back and forth on this a bunch of times. In the end I think "5 ways to improve your product analytics data" is the most eye catching
```suggestion
title: 5 ways to improve your product analytics data
```

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - anna-debenham
featuredImage: ../images/blog/super-hog-pink.png
featuredImageType: full

> category: General

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
category: Engineering
```

  - If the property's value is a date or timestamp, include _date or _timestamp at the end. For example, `user_creation_date`, `last_login_timestamp`.

## 2. Filter out internal users

A common mistake I see is developers inadvertently inflating their own metrics by not filtering out their own usage. This leads to massive bias in their data – especially in startups that have few users!

For this reason, it's important to filter out events sent by your own team. There are a few ways to do this:

- Filter out events from users with internal emails.
- Add a property on your events `is_employee` or `is_test_user` and filter events where these are `true`.
- Exclude internal IPs from your analytics tracking.
- Filter events by domain host e.g., exclude `localhost:3000`, `staging.yourapp.com`.
- Turn off tracking in development using a `localhost`, `dev`, or config check.

> **Tip:** Rather than add these filters to each new [insight](/docs/product-analytics/insights) you create, set it as your default filter.
> 
> For a detailed guide on how to do this in PostHog, see the tutorial on [how to filter out internal users in PostHog](/tutorials/filter-internal-users).

> ## 3. Prefer backend to frontend tracking

Reviewer 2: Should we add something in this section about:

1. The backend libraries we support / setup guides for backend tracking in PostHog
2. How to label backend events vs frontend events in PostHog? 

On the latter, I assume that's a use case Data Management and applying tags to events to show where they were captured?

Author: On both points: We have 2 callouts already (out of 5 points), so I'm reluctant to add more posthog specific information, in order to avoid pushing posthog too hard in this post

> How to label backend events vs frontend events in PostHog?

There are a few ways to do this in PostHog e.g. posthog logs a property from which library the event came from

3. You have complete control of your backend implementation and execution.

Where possible, it's a good idea to log events on your server instead of your client. Here's a guide to help you decide when to rely on frontend or backend analytics:

- Use frontend analytics where getting partial data is acceptable, and you want to:
  - Understand user journeys, such as the sequence of pages a user visits.
  - Track user interactions like clicks, scrolls, or form submissions.
  - Gather data on client-side performance, like page load times and responsiveness.

- Use backend analytics (or query your database) if:
  - You need accurate data – e.g., the number of users that signed up in the last week.
  - You want to analyze data alongside other business metrics.

## 4. Deploy a reverse proxy

As mentioned above, tracking blockers can prevent your events from being sent. To make your frontend analytics more reliable, you can capture your events using a reverse proxy.

A reverse proxy enables you to send events to your analytics provider through your domain instead of your provider's. This makes events less likely to be intercepted by tracking blockers.

> > **Tip:** If you're using PostHog to capture events, here's how you can [set up a reverse proxy](/docs/advanced/proxy).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 💡 **PostHog Tip:** If you're using PostHog to capture events, here's how you can [set up a reverse proxy](/docs/advanced/proxy).
```
